---
layout: post
title: "Making S3 buckets public is not the solution"
date:   2022-05-26 19:00:00 +0200
author: Sakis Kasampalis
tags:
- s3
- aw
- iam
- access
- policy
---

After doing an IAM cleanup and creating user groups to limit user permissions, our data scientists at work reported a problem. They are using Athena and boto3 to access S3 buckets programmatically, and that stopped working. They started seeing the following error message instead:

{% highlight bash %}
An error occurred (AccessDeniedException) when calling the StartQueryExecution operation...
{% endhighlight %}

While looking for solutions, I was disappointed to see that almost all of them suggested modifying the bucket's policy. Adding a custom S3 bucket policy means disabling the "Block all public access" default setting. Blocking all public access on S3 is a great practice. That's what AWS recommends and we should not change it unless there's a very serious reason to do so.

So, after rejecting these suggestions I checked a bit more carefully our IAM user group policies and found that Force_MFA was attached to our data science group. Although forcing MFA is a very good practice when it comes to individual user accounts, it can cause problems when attached to a user group. The policy documentation says that:

"This policy allows users to manage their own passwords and MFA devices but nothing else unless they authenticate with MFA."

Well, when accessing an S3 bucket programmatically, you are not expected to use an MFA device. Thus, removing the Force_MFA policy from the user group fixed the issue.
